---
title: "Issue #21: We Are The World"
description: "Even if we all are different, we go through the same hurdles and share both the pains and the gains."
pubDate: "June 23 2025"
published: true
heroImage: "/issue-covers/21.png"
tags:
  [
    "react",
    "nextjs",
    "tanstack",
    "complexity",
    "astro",
    "analog",
    "sveltekit",
    "hono",
    "complexity"
  ]
---

[🎶 _There comes a time when we heed a certain call, when the world must come together as one..._ 🎶](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6IsEiTX0Auc&list=PLYRq_7Yox1jDETeL_YgKUc8DXduCV9jA2&index=22)

I always like when something nostalgic pops up in the informational field of the web development. It allows to reflect on the path or industry have passed and ideate (_or fantasize?_) on the bright future we all may have. So this issue is largely about the retrospective research of the problems/solutions the JavaScript [meta]frameworks community came through/to during the last years, along with some news from different parts of the ecosystem.

## The Good

I was really excited to read [this deep piece](https://blog.isquaredsoftware.com/2025/06/react-community-2025/) about React ecosystem from Mark "acemarke" Erikson — [the person](https://blog.isquaredsoftware.com/about/) who definitely knows a thing or two about this topic. React, being a part of the most popular metaframeworks around, including Next, Remix, TanStack Start, and (_optionally_) Astro, and serving an inspiration (_in either positive or negative way_) for all the others, had became something ubiquitous on web to the extent most building tools support it (_or JSX as a least_) by default these days. There is everything in this article: good an bad parts, love and hate (_some scandals overview included!_), rants and ideas — but all in all, it gives a good perspective on where we are and where we are (_and should be_) heading to.

> This hopefully answers a lot of questions about how and why React has developed the way it has, what the influences are on React's development process, the main goals of the React team, and where React usage patterns stand today. I also hope I've been able to dispel some of the confusion and FUD around the React team's motivations and reasons for pushing in specific directions. It's fine if people disagree with the technical directions, or decide that they don't need React Server Components or to migrate to a larger framework. But the React team's intentions are valid and genuine here. It's really hard to maintain widely-used libraries and satisfy the variety of needs and usage patterns in the community. I do think the React team has done a good job overall.

## The Bad

The last week I had stumbled upon [the underestimated research](https://dev.to/felipestanzani/life-after-nextjs-a-new-and-sunny-start-29n2) (_from Felipe Stanzani_) on Next.js positive and negative sides and options one have if they want to leave this popular place and have some good rest. Interestingly, I have more or less the same thought on alternatives to Next.js myself so it was a good experience to dive into for me, especially in terms of the depiction of great work that happens behind cooking TanStack Start.

> It's important to emphasize that despite being developed by the same team that builds the entire suite of TanStack libraries, one of TanStack Start's principles is that you are not obliged to use any of them. It's an independent framework.

Notably, there was [the good detailed comparison](https://dev.to/logrocket/tanstack-start-vs-nextjs-choosing-the-right-full-stack-react-framework-io5) of Next.js and TanStack from the LogRocket guys too.

> If you’re looking to move away from boilerplate-heavy workflows and want type-safe routing, smarter data fetching, and the flexibility to structure your app your way, TanStack Start might be exactly what you need.

Quite generic (_and with a smell of light LLM painting for sure_), as usual for the LogRocket's team of technical writers, but at the same time insightful in terms of the side-by-side [analysis](https://metaframe.works/comparison/), if you consider something like migration, or choose from these two options specifically.

Another notable thing which is always interesting for JS community (_even though solidifying its flighty reputation_) is appearance of a new [meta]framework] which in general is good, even though blurring the curious developer focus each time. This [one (literally)](https://onestack.dev) is based on our good friend React and brings the accent on the capabilities for cross-platform development, which is definitely a good (_though not very new or original_) and demanded niche in the modern world of short-span AI-driven vibe-software-craftsmanship. The one provide a good DX for developing with React and React Native (side-by-side), with some inspirations from existing solutions (like Remix, for instance) potentially simplifying migration. There are definitely some complexity tradeoffs (common for such flexible approaches, to be fair), but all in all, you're doing something complex if you reach out to the One anyways.

## The Noteworthy

Existing mainstream metaframework vendors also didn't stand still the recent weeks and came up with a bunch of interesting milestones on their ways to perfection.

Astro team published their [beautiful round-number minor](https://astro.build/blog/astro-5100/) which introduces such interesting experiment as the real-time-fetched live content collections, in addition to solidifying a lot of existing experimental features. The guys are [preparing something interesting](https://bsky.app/profile/astro.build/post/3ls2ereedsc24) for us this week too, so I personally am all ears and all eyes. Meanwhile, if you're into Astro too, check out [the deep writeup on Astro integrations](https://lou.gg/blog/astro-integrations-explained) from Louis Escher — definitely something any advanced project needs to be aware of.

Analog got a [new minor too](https://github.com/analogjs/analog/releases/tag/v1.18.0) bringing improvements and fixes to component templates and aligning the tool better with [the recent Angular 20 update](https://metaframe.works/archive/20/#:~:text=the%20Angular%20team%20has%20released%20their%20version%20#20%20of%20this%20one%20of%20the%20most%20popular%20frontend%20frameworks).

[The new technical update](https://github.com/sveltejs/kit/releases/tag/%40sveltejs/kit%402.22.0) to SvelteKit brings support for Vite 7 and Rolldown betas — and that's really cool that the guys let everyone play with the new tools that early (_especially taking into account Rolldown being directly inspired and API-guided by the Svelte's homie Rollup_).

Better metaframeworkization (sorry!) comes to Hono with it's [new minor](https://github.com/honojs/hono/releases/tag/v4.8.0) providing decent enhancements for routing and lots of new enablements for different kinds of tooling integrations bringing Hono even more flexibility it's already quite famous for.

All in all, everyone is cooking something good this summer, and I bet September will bring a lavish amount of cool new releases, both in the React world and in the JS metaframeworks ecosystem in general. I also cook something new and fancy for this newsletter, not related to any underlying tools but rather some messaging and additional goodies which will hopefully bring some value to the readers and wider audience. So if you like this project, I would really appreciate you sharing a word.

👋
