---
title: "Issue #35: Crazy Train"
description: "Not all the hype is annoying and miserable, especially if we talk about metaframeworks."
pubDate: "Nov 21 2025"
published: false
heroImage: "/issue-covers/35.png"
tags: ["tanstack", "remix", "sveltekit", "astro", "security", "redwoodjs", "svelte", "fresh"]
---

[🎶 _I've listened to preachers, I've listened to fools; I've watched all the dropouts who make their own rules..._ 🎶](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8lD5bfqzr6E&list=PLYRq_7Yox1jDETeL_YgKUc8DXduCV9jA2&index=36)

FOMO is strong in metaframeworks-driven world. Partly because it is JavaScript and this programming language was even created because of FOMO. But mostly it is the fast pace of the ecosystem development, especially in this crazy AI era. FOMO drives and feeds the hype train, and unfortunately metaframeworks, being a medley of everything hypey in the modern tech world, are always in the rearguard of the move. There are good parts to it, like continuous improvement and innovation. There are bad parts and side effects to it too, like attracting wrong folks with wrong intentions. Let's see if we were able to find a balance the last fortnight.

## The Good

Syntax podcast regularly brings tasty treats for web developers, metaframework fiends included. This show is one of the pillars of the modern web dev thought leadership and it is either responsible for some many hype trains launches of the last years or did due job in adding steam to them by putting some FOMO coal into the enginge. There's nothing bad in it and that's how media work so I always listen to guys with (a bit sceptical but still) curiosity. Several of the last episodes were dedicated to metaframeworks topics and even welcomed some great metaframeworks people so there's a whole bunch of hours of audio content for your inquisitive ears.

In [the first of them](https://syntax.fm/show/951/a-first-look-at-remix-3), Wes and Scott taken a look at the weird new kid on the metaframeworks block — Remix 3. After [pompous introduction](https://metaframe.works/archive/33/#:~:text=the%20introduction%20of%20Remix%203%2C%20or%20rather%20some%20new%20details%20on%20what%20it%E2%80%99s%20going%20to%20be), another new reincarntion of Remix (not a React Router flavour this time) drawn some FOMO attention thus it was doomed to be exposed and dug into by Syntax. So if you want a clean and simple look (as opposed to multi-hour official presentation), definitely check out this advanced sneak peak.

[The next interesting episode](https://syntax.fm/show/954/fullstack-tanstack-the-scoop-with-tanner-linsley) was dedicated to discussing TanStack Start, the long-anticipated TanStack-based and TanStack-driven metaframework from Tanner Linsley. This one is much more straightforward, less esoteric, and definitely predictably well-engineered piece of software with lots of advanced techniques. 

In [the latest one](https://syntax.fm/show/955/sveltekit-has-solved-data-loading) Scott being a Svelte fanboy sits down with Wes to dissiminate intricacies of the latest new (and sometimes confusing) SvelteKit features, namely and especially remote functions and updates to forms processing in this regard.


## The Bad

We all know, the new technology and metaframeworks are cool and fun. Until they are safe. And as with any sophisticated piece of technology, one should be very cautious about this aspect of the tooling ecosystem.

[The metaframeworks hacker, zhero](https://metaframe.works/archive/11/#:~:text=His%20name%20is%20Rachid%20Allam), came up with a [new deep research](https://zhero-web-sec.github.io/research-and-things/astro-framework-and-standards-weaponization) and vulnerability disclosure — this time the victim was Astro, and the pass was the middleware (again). I admire how this guy toughtfully derives the ideas from official standards, and I celebrate he's doing that for good, because the latest and new `npm` vulnerabilities (see the details on [this Adspect Cloaking campaign](https://socket.dev/blog/npm-malware-campaign-uses-adspect-cloaking-to-deliver-malicious-redirects), or [the `expr-eval` package issue](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/popular-javascript-library-expr-eval-vulnerable-to-rce-flaw/)), for instance, weren't that fun and well-mannered. The official security advisory is available [here](https://github.com/withastro/astro/security/advisories/GHSA-hr2q-hp5q-x767), so don't forget to update your Astro-based projects correspondingly.

The much bigger noise was raised by [the recent Cloudflare outage](https://blog.cloudflare.com/18-november-2025-outage/). You can ask, what is there for the metaframeworks industry? Well, in my humble oppinion, it is just another good lesson on avoiding vendor lock in, both globally, and especially with specific tools you use, for instance metaframeworks like RedwoodSDK, which is built around (and laser focused at) the Cloudflare infrastructure. And while the tools themselves are great, one should always weigh the risks of narrowing down the escape routes.

## The Noteworthy

Nevertheless, RedwoodSDK proceeds coming closer to declaring stability, so the guys [had announced](https://rwsdk.com/blog/redwoodsdk-v1-beta) the beta state for their v1, with lots of fixes and improvements, if you feel adventurous enough to risk and support the comparatively new and noble project.

If you on the other hand want to know a bit more news on Svelte and SvelteKit, in addition to what Wes and Scott already told ya, you should definitely check out [the latest official November's blogpost](https://svelte.dev/blog/whats-new-in-svelte-november-2025) which will tell you among other stuff some detailed facts about forms improvements and using the new `fork` API in SvelteKit.

Fresh 2.2.0, in addition to new helpers and fixes, [brings](https://github.com/denoland/fresh/releases/tag/2.2.0) significant additions and examples to the docs, which is really cool, because I think that's probably something Fresh misses the most — some better and more attractive explanations of the mechanics details.

As you could see, many (if not the most) news this issue of the Metaframeworks Records were dedicated to hype and FOMO and everything around. And almost everywhere, there was a counterpart where some boring guy (or a boring outage) came and said, "We don't do that here". And it still makes sense to build software with boring JS tech like Express.js and JQuery. But probably the better way sometimes would be to welcome innovation and calmly select those technologies that make more (and safer) sense. That's why we're here, so hopefully, see you next time on the train going to bright metaframeworks future.

👋
